[GSoC 2024] Student Blog for Key4hep Project - Braulio Rivas (#1572)
HSF/hsf.github.io: _gsocblogs/2024/blog_Key4hep_BraulioRivas.md

1. Implement loading of Cluster, ParticleID, Reconstructed Particle, Vertex, and Track collections types by allowing users to upload JSON file(s).
2. Design appropriate graphical representations for every collection type defined by analyzing each type's properties.
3. Develop tools to filter, manipulate, highlight, and group related collections and objects to allow users to explore the visualized events easily.
4. Conduct testing to cover the new features using data from FCC events, either pre-generated or newly generated, to ensure that every version of EDM4hep can be handled correctly.
5. Incorporate CI/CD rules to automate the deployment of dmX, enabling users to always access the tool's latest version.

# Coding period

**CI/CD rules**

At the very beginning, I started with new CI rules to automate development for eede. We wanted to do a few things: deploy a
preview of any pull request, so when making changes, in some way an URL will be available to use eede with the changes from the
PR, so its easier to review changes. It was harder than expected, but we finally were able to configure Github Actions to make

> it work. Also, it was very simple to later add tests whenever running these previews, or before merging to main.

Reviewer: I think this would be a good opportunity to actually mention the challenges we ran into and how we solved them in the end.

| Fix previews workflow                                                 | [#22](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/pull/22) | I had some problems incorporating previews, so this PR tries to solve this issue (unsuccessfully).                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Configure previews with access tokens and check out to fork           | [#24](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/pull/24) | This PR finally fixed previews, by correctly configuring a GitHub environment that uses fined grained access tokens to checkout to the PR and deploy the code in the original repo.                                                                                                     |

**Loading**

After setting up the environment, I expanded the loading functionality. As explained above, at the beginning, eede could only

> load one type of datatype. However, there are many more, so I created a function called [`loadObjects`](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/blob/main/js/types/load.js#L47)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
load one datatype. However, there are many more, so I created a function called [`loadObjects`](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/blob/main/js/types/load.js#L47)
```

Reviewer: The link should probably also use a permalink, otherwise it might point to the wrong place with future changes.

> that can load **all** of the datatypes from EDM4hep. But, internally is limited to load only those from the goals. Further

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that can load **all** of the datatypes from EDM4hep. However, internally we deliberately limit this to load only those for which visualizations have been implemented. Further
```

> work its easier because it only will be necessary to expand other modules, and not loading in order to load all the datatypes.

Reviewer: You mention it in the table below, but I think this warrants another sentence here: This loading can also deal with different schema versions of edm4hep and has tooling to facilitate adding a new version. This is a very useful feature and you could highlight it explicitly in the text.

**Loading**
| Pull Request| PR Number | Description |
| :--- | :----: | :--- |
| Load particles according to edm4hep | [#36](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/pull/36) | I developed a function that allows to load any kind of object into eede and a way to get the latest version of EDM4hep so it can load any file according to the latest version. |

**Visualizing**

> Having the data loaded on memory, I was able to later develop the visualization of these new datatypes. For each new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having the data loaded in memory, I was able to later develop the visualization of these new datatypes. For each new
```

> datatype, a few properties have to be shown for an "object" belonging to that collection, and the whole collection has to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
datatype, a few properties have to be shown for an "object" belonging to a collection, and the whole collection has to be
```

> placed around in a way its easier to understand. I discussed with mentors [what information](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/blob/main/js/types/objects.js) to show and most importantly,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
placed around in a way its easy to understand. I discussed with mentors [what information](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/blob/main/js/types/objects.js) to show and most importantly,
```

| :----------------------------------------- | :--------------------------------------------: | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Visualization of MCParticle + RecoParticle | [#43](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/pull/43) | Views for `RecoParticle` and existing relations between this and `MCParticle`.                                                  |
| Views for cluster and track                | [#48](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/pull/48) | I added a views for `Cluster` and `Track` plus relations that exists between `MCParticles`-`Cluster` and `MCParticles`-`Track`. |
| Initial views for particleID and vertex    | [#55](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/pull/55) | More views for `ParticleId` and `Vertex`.                                                                                       |

**Pixi**

eede is a static website. So we are using plain Javascript, HTML and CSS. But for visualization, we were using the Canvas API,

> so all datatypes are drawn in a white canvas. Nevertheless, when having many objects in a same view, it was almost impossible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so all datatypes are drawn in a white canvas. However, when having many objects in one view, it was almost impossible
```

to scroll or drag objects around. So I [analyzed](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/pull/63) some of the weak points at that moment.
I came to the conclusion to change Canvas API to some more performant tool, and to find a way to render objects more efficiently.
After some research, I found [pixi.js](https://pixijs.com/), a library (which has a minified `js` version) that uses WebGL

> to render any kind of content on a canvas very, but very fast. After a bit of rework, I finally transferred everything to pixi.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to render any kind of content on a canvas very fast. After a bit of rework, I finally transferred everything to pixi.
```
I think. Otherwise some half sentence is missing here before the `but`

The difference was big. Before, eede struggled to render a tree of `MCParticle` from this file https://fccsw.web.cern.ch/fccsw/eede/wzp6_ee_mumuH_ecm240_CLD_RECO.edm4hep.json
(by some reason, it was only possible in Firefox, but not on a chromium based browser). But it later had no problem, it
rendered everything fast without crashing.
Other very noticeable example is when rendering $15000+$ `MCParticle`s. When using Canvas API, the ram consumption went up by a lot

> and freezed the computer. But after using pixi and applying some techniques, like [culling](https://pixijs.com/8.x/guides/basics/scene-graph#culling)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and froze the computer. But after using pixi and applying some techniques, like [culling](https://pixijs.com/8.x/guides/basics/scene-graph#culling)
```

it had no problem and takes only the necessary amount of memory.
| Pull Request| PR Number | Description |
| :--- | :----: | :--- |
| Use pixi | [#65](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/pull/65) | I changed the rendering engine from Canvas API to pixi.js. This PR also includes a few changes to make the rendering more efficient. |

**Filters**

> One of the last tasks was to develop a set of filtering functionalities, because in one single event may exists lots
> of objects, making it harder to visualize. So, I developed filters for every datatype, that would allow to filter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the last tasks was to develop a set of filtering functionalities, because in one single event many
objects might exist, making it harder to visualize. So, I developed filters for every datatype, that allow to filter
```

![CERN-GSOC](https://hepsoftwarefoundation.org/images/CERN-HSF-GSoC-logo.png)

# The problem

eede (EDM4hep Event Data Explorer, which was previously called dmx) is a tool that allows physicists to **visualize** data in the EDM4hep format. [EDM4hep](https://edm4hep.web.cern.ch/) is a generic event data model for future HEP collider experiments. In High Energy Physics (HEP), accelerators like LHC collide many particles. In this context, an **event** refers to the collision of particles, which is later detected by detectors like CMS or ATLAS. However, several steps related to each other are taken to **reconstruct** these events. Every step of the event takes an input and produces an output. However, the internal functioning typically differs between tools and some software is necessary to ensure that this whole process is correct. This way, EDM4hep serves as an Event Data Model to represent data exchanged between different events, meanwhile eede allows us to analyze this data from EDM4hep visually.

> However, eede had a problem. It only allowed to visualize a specific datatype, the `MCParticle`. This is a problem because the data model has many other datatypes that are relevant when analyzing an event, and being able to look at all of them allows to detect anomalies that we otherwise be hard to detect using other techniques. This is why the project "Any collection in Data Model Explorer" was created. The goal was to incorporate new features for eede, adding a whole new set of datatypes that eede can visualize (according to the EDM4hep event data model). This way, we can visualize not only the original simulated event, but also explore many types of relations that exists between reconstructed (as well as simulated) objects. Here we have a diagram that better represents the schema of available types of and how objects can be related among each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, eede had a problem. It only allowed to visualize a specific datatype, the `MCParticle`. This is a problem because the data model has many other datatypes that are relevant when analyzing an event, and being able to look at all of them allows to detect anomalies that would otherwise be hard to detect using other techniques. This is why the project "Any collection in Data Model Explorer" was created. The goal was to incorporate new features for eede, adding a whole new set of datatypes that eede can visualize (according to the EDM4hep event data model). This way, we can visualize not only the original simulated event, but also explore many types of relations that exist between reconstructed (as well as simulated) objects. Here we have a diagram that better represents the schema of available types of and how objects can be related among each other.
```
Minor typos / grammar

![EDM4hep Model](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/key4hep/EDM4hep/main/doc/edm4hep_diagram.svg)

# Proposed solution

> The original [goal](https://hepsoftwarefoundation.org/gsoc/2024/proposal_Key4hepAnyCollectionInDataModelExplorer.html) was to allow to visualize all the remaining **datatypes** in EDM4hep, allow to filter collections and test on simulated FCC (Future Circular Collider) events. However, due to time constraints, together with mentors we decided to expand the functionality of eede to the most important set of datatypes than initially thought during the proposal development phase. After some discussion, we defined these goals:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The original [goal](https://hepsoftwarefoundation.org/gsoc/2024/proposal_Key4hepAnyCollectionInDataModelExplorer.html) was to allow to visualize all the remaining **datatypes** in EDM4hep, allow to filter collections and test on simulated Future Circular Collider (FCC) events. However, due to time constraints, together with the mentors we decided to expand the functionality of eede to the most important set of datatypes during the proposal development phase. After some discussion, we defined these goals:
```
- Abbreviations are usually introduced like this.
- There seems to be a left over issue with previous corrections (?)

> 1. Implement loading of Cluster, ParticleID, Reconstructed Particle, Vertex, and Track collections types from user provided JSON file(s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Implement loading of `Cluster`, `ParticleID`, `ReconstructedParticle`, `Vertex`, and `Track` collections types from user provided JSON file(s).
```
Minor typesetting improvements

preview of any pull request, so when making changes, in some way an URL will be available to use eede with the changes from the
PR, so its easier to review changes. It was harder than expected:

1. I tried to use [pr-preview-action](https://github.com/rossjrw/pr-preview-action) workflow. However, it didn't work because I didn't configure correctly which branch to deploy. Then, I found out that `gh-pages` had to be the branch to deploy.
2. It didn't work. I even had a testing repository, where it worked. However, this workflow (without modification) only works for pull request from branches of the same repository. So if someone makes a fork (which is the standard way), it would not work. This is problematic, because then open source contributors wouldn't be able to further develop this tool, and the essence of open source would be gone.
3. Github Environment Variables was the missing part. It allows to use a variable, like a github fine grained access token to execute a set of allowed operations in the original repo. So when opening a PR, it would run the preview workflow, but with enough permissions.
4. It failed again. Because eede is from an organization account, the

>    fine grained access token has to be created from someone with enough privilege in the organization. However, after waiting short time for approval, we were finally able to generate a correct token and previews finally worked correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   fine grained access token has to be created from someone with enough privilege in the organization. However, after the mentors generated a correct token previews finally worked correctly.
```

| Configure previews with access tokens and check out to fork           | [#24](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/pull/24) | This PR finally fixed previews, by correctly configuring a GitHub environment that uses fined grained access tokens to checkout to the PR and deploy the code in the original repo.                                                                                                     |

**Loading**

After setting up the environment, I expanded the loading functionality. As explained above, at the beginning, eede could only
load one type of datatype. However, there are many more, so I created a function called [`loadObjects`](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/blob/32d50c7fab3fa244767aa012cdc5ba891339abef/js/types/load.js#L47-L226)
that can load **all** of the datatypes from EDM4hep. However, internally we deliberately limit this to load only those for which visualizations have been implemented. This loading can **also** deal with **different** schema versions of edm4hep and has tooling to facilitate adding a **new** version. Further

> work its easier because it only will be necessary to expand other modules, and not loading in order to load all the datatypes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
work is now easier because it only will be necessary to expand other modules, and not loading in order to load all the datatypes.
```

**Loading**
| Pull Request| PR Number | Description |
| :--- | :----: | :--- |
| Load particles according to edm4hep | [#36](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/pull/36) | I developed a function that allows to load any kind of object into eede and a way to get the latest version of EDM4hep so it can load any file according to the latest version. |

**Visualizing**

Having the data loaded in memory, I was able to later develop the visualization of these new datatypes. For each new
datatype, a few properties have to be shown for an "object" belonging to a collection, and the whole collection has to be

> placed around in a way its easy to understand. I discussed with mentors [what information](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/blob/main/js/types/objects.js) to show and most importantly,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
placed around in a way its easy to understand. I discussed with the mentors [what information](https://github.com/key4hep/eede/blob/main/js/types/objects.js) to show and most importantly,
```
